---
title: "The True Cost of ICT"
subtitle: "From Materiality to Techno-Solutionism"
bigimg:
    - "img/escraps.jpg" : "Scrap components in a smartphone repair shop. Arnhem, The Netherlands, May 2022."
---


[ICT4s 2024](https://conf.researchr.org/home/ict4s-2024)



# Scope and Objectives

In the past few decades, the word technology has become synonymous to
digital technology or simply ‘tech’. The tech industry of today generates a
variety of gadgets, products and services that proliferates in numbers that
is beyond most of our imaginations and determines our lives in ways we do
not even realise. However, it is the semiconductor chips, one of most
important component in this digital world, that glues together everything
tech [1].  The growth of semiconductor technology is unprecedented compared
to any other industrial sector, from 2000 components in a semiconductor
chip in ‘70s to 50 billion today [2]. The resulting impact in our digital
life is so enormous that chips are now compared to air, both invisible and
indispensable [3]. This growth is driven by a self-imposed innovation
paradigm, by the power of the ICT sector to manufacture a demand for
processing capacity that can only be satisfied by another generation of
chips, by a framework of regulations and policy that emphasizes growth and
competitiveness over sufficiency [4], and by an unwavering belief in
Moore’s law (i.e., semiconductor chips doubling in capacity every 2 years,
no matter what purpose they serve). This enormous ‘progress’ came with the
ubiquity and affluence of our digital lives, but also with significant
environmental problems (mostly externalised to the Global South) associated
to water, energy and material consumption, not only during production [5],
but also in its usage [6] and end-of-life as e-Waste related pollution [7].

This unparalleled growth over the last 50 years has created for some an
apparent ‘technological utopia’ with such limitless capabilities it is
implicated in the solution to major global challenges such as the climate
crisis. In contrast, we hypothesise that the never-ending cycle of
innovation in digital/semiconductor technologies and the resulting newness
is a prime driver of techno-solutionism in our collective imagination. This
dangerous narrative, we argue, has an even bigger impact than present day
material and carbon footprint of ICT. The well-known rebound effect can
also be considered as a consequence of techno-solutionism, where continuous
drive to make power efficient ICT infrastructure ultimately results in an
increased number of devices with even larger total energy and material
consumption.

Techno-Solutionism is the deeply ingrained belief that there are
technological solutions to all problems faced by humanity, even where they
have originated form our over reliance on technology itself [8], [9]. This
is a narrative that is prevalent in the contemporary world, primarily,
though not exclusively in the Global North, and has an impact in beliefs
and critically policies that permeate our world and its governance. Mainly
through technology, it is argued, we could achieve a sustainable utopia,
full of economic growth/affluence that does not cause undue harm [10],
[11]. While this is an impossible dream, in reality, this optimism actively
impedes a more decisive, meaningful and immediate action on climate (or
societal) change.  The techno-solutionist belief has become increasingly
pervasive within the general public and policy makers, particularly as a
way to counter climate change [12].


## Aims and Objectives

We want to bring a group of like-minded and critical colleagues in
understanding the immediate materiality of semiconductor industry and the
techno-solutionism it exudes. We will investigate this long term impacts of
green-tech solutions avidly promoted by technology companies (and supported
by governments in the Global North) as a matter of climate injustice [13],
[14]. We aim to critically assess how the ‘progress’ in this industry helps
to drive this optimism and increase our reliance on future green
technologies (e.g., renewable energy, electric vehicles, carbon capture,
geoengineering), while ignoring immediate consequences of climate change
and less techno-centric nature based solutions. More specifically, how the
immense investment and general utopia around the semiconductor industry,
the beating heart of all of modern technologies, is a key ingredient of our
reliance on futuristic technological solutions for climate crisis.  Within
this optimism/solutionism what gets ignored is the externalised cost and
harm of these ‘green/renewable’ technologies and the new problems they
bring when scaled up [13]. We will work toward understanding the drivers
and material dependencies of these technologies, their dependence on
semiconductors and identify a research roadmap toward quantifying these
effects.


# Call for Contributions

We ask workshop participants to submit short abstracts on topics broadly
connects the list below:

1. Multi-pronged approach in understanding the global impact of
   semiconductor industry
2. Increased material and carbon impact of advanced semiconductor
   technology nodes
3. Interdisciplinary dialogue on techno- solutionism and its harm,
   particularly to Global South
4. How techno-solutionism and the growth of the semiconductor industry feed
   into each other
5. Digital and non-digital approaches and critical perspectives towards
   addressing techno- solutionism
6. The amplification of techno-solutionist ideas through (European)
   industrial policy, regulation, and research and innovation funding.


The true environmental impact of ICT cannot only be limited to its material
(and carbon) cost. The ICT industry of today generates a variety of
products and services that has proliferated in numbers and determines our
lives in ways we do not even realise. But it also creates a myth of
techno-solutionism, that it is only through technology we can solve most
problems in the world, including climate change.  The tremendous progress
made in digital/semiconductor technologies (that glues together all things
‘tech’) in the last 5 decades is a prime driver of techno-solutionism in
our collective imagination. The growth of semiconductor technology is
unprecedented compared to any other industrial sector. The resulting impact
on our digital life is so enormous that semiconductor chips are now
compared to air, both invisible and indispensable. Driven by a self-imposed
innovation paradigm, commonly known as Moore’s law, this enormous
‘progress’ came with significant environmental problems mostly externalised
to the Global South (water, energy and material consumption during
production and end-of-life pollution keeps on growing for every new
generation of semiconductor chips). This never-ending cycle of innovation
not only creates new gadgets and invents newer forms of consumerism but
feeds into the techno-solutionist narrative. This narrative actively
impedes all other forms of sustainability actions that doesn’t depend on
future technological development.  In this workshop, we will investigate
these deep connections and the true multidimensional costs of the ICT
industry.


# Register and Participate 

Before you register for "The True Cost of ICT," please consider submitting
a short abstract to our [Call for
Contributions](./index.html#call-for-contributions) above.

You can register for  through the [ICT4s 2024
Website](https://conf.researchr.org/home/ict4s-2024). Further information
for on-site and online participants will be provided there.


# Worshop Schedule

**Coming soon!**


# Organisers

- Srinjoy Mitra, University of Edinburgh
- Adrian Friday, Lancaster University
- Jan Tobias Mühlberg, Universite Libre de Bruxelles


# References

